---
title: TODO
tags: functional programming
---
When I set out to learn functional programming, it was difficult to find
approachable learning material -- this is my attempt to create it!

As programs grow large, it becomes difficult to understand the state of
a program and how it is affected by method calls -- functional programming
tries to solve that problem by limiting the amount of state the programmer needs to
understand while using functions.

### Limiting input
The only allowed inputs to a function are its arguments -- a function
cannot access any member variables or global variables. Therefore, when
writing or changing a function, the programmer can see all of the state
from the rest of the program that they need to understand in the function
signature:

{% highlight javascript %}
// Functional programming example:
// This function can't see member or global vars!
function updateBoard(currentBoard, nextRow) {
    var boardCopy = currentBoard.slice(); // I'll explain why we copy later
    boardCopy.push(nextRow);
    return boardCopy;
}
{% endhighlight %}

This simplifies things for the programmer's mind:

* All of the inputs are in one place, just a glance away
* The programmer doesn't have to keep track of which member variables could be
  useful and consciously dismiss those that are not

### ? Explicit contracts by limiting effects
A function is not allowed to modify its arguments. When calling a function,
the programmer doesn't have to worry about the state of the program
changing: the only effect a function can have is to return a value.

{% highlight javascript %}
// Functional programming example
function playTurn(currentBoard, ...) {
    ...
    var playerRow = getNextRow(playerInput);
    var boardWithPlayer = updateBoard(currentBoard, playerRow);

    var computerRow = getComputerTurn(currentBoard);
    var newBoard = updateBoard(boardWithPlayer, computerRow);
    return newBoard;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Let's compare with a conventional programming style:

{% highlight javascript %}
// Conventional programming example
var board;
...

function playTurn(...) {
    ...
    var playerRow = getNextRow(playerInput); // accesses board
    updateBoard(playerRow);

    // Uh oh! Can you spot the bug?
    var computerRow = getComputerTurn(); // accesses board
    updateBoard(computerRow);
}
{% endhighlight %}

In our functional programming example, `getComputerTurn` took in the
board before it was modified by the player. However, in the conventional
programming example, the behavior is less clear -- does `getComputerTurn`
use `board` at all? If so, should the player's turn have been added to
`board` before using `getComputerTurn`?

Why is the conventional programming example less clear? Methods that
modify state create hidden contracts between methods of the program. In
our example, `getComputerTurn` must be called before `updateTurn(playerRow)`,
which is not clear while writing this function definition. Additionally,
these hidden contracts are less explicit and more difficult to follow
when they change state outside of the function such as member variables.

Functional programming avoids these problems by not changing existing
state: a function can't modify its inputs. However, it can return a value
in order to create new state. This, with the idea that all inputs to a
function are listed when the function is used, makes the contract of a
function explicit -- it takes in existing state and returns a new state,
keeping the old state unchanged in case it is needed elsewhere.

This example may feel contrived -- the conventional example could have
had more comments! -- but the difficulty increases in real programs:
there are more state variables, more undocumented contracts, etc. Think
about how these ideas can affect a programmer who is refactoring a system
they are not familiar with!

### Avoiding all hidden state
For a given input, a function must return the same output value. If it
does, the function cannot have state or hidden contracts, both of which
can be difficult to understand, as we saw in the previous section.

For example, a function like `readStringFromFile(path)` will not always
return the same value (depending on the file contents) since it is
returning state stored on disk! Any challenges we saw with state in the
previous section could be recreated on disk and be hard to understand.

## Summary

1. The only inputs to a function are its arguments
1. A function cannot modify its arguments
1. For some given inputs, a function must return the same output

Together, these three ideas force functions to be stateless<sup>1</sup>,
which, as we have seen, avoids many of the pitfalls of functions with
state.

But if functions can't have state, how does the program have state?
Essentially, state can be passed into fuct TODO

In the previous section, I also mentioned reading from disk is inherently
stateful so how do functional programming languages read from disk, given
these rules on functions? It turns out these limitations are more like
guidelines. The programmer should follow them whenever possible but avoid
them when impractical -- each language chooses how strict it is about these
guidelines.

And what are the trade-offs?

* You can still program poorly (e.g. having too many args limits benefits)

### Additional notes:
TODO: no you?

* You can write functional style code in many non-functional languages (e.g. I
used JavaScript in my examples)
* I like the consistency of functional code -- pass in some inputs, get
an output. Functions practically use themselves. Compare this to classes
where you have to learn how the internal state changes when you call methods
in order to use the object correctly (e.g. I'm reminded of various
calendar & date classes)
* Functional programming languages have many other features that are
  associated with functional programming but aren't inherently functional -- this is
largely due to functional programming's connections with academia. Some of
these features are: higher-order functions, robust type systems, immutability, recursion optimizations, and lazy evaluation. TODO: connections w/ a?

---

<sub>1: These are known as "pure functions"</sub>
